### Development Around Light Rail (MAX) Methodology

This analysis attempts to capture the amount of development that has occurred within walking distance of MAX stations since the time it was confirmed that these stations (and consequently the associated light rail lines) would be built.  Two primary statistics are used to quantify this development: the market, dollar value of tax lots (including the value of built structures) that are within walking distance of a MAX station and have been developed since that station was approved to be built, and the number of multi-family housing units constructed on those tax lots in that time frame.

The first phase of this project is to determine which areas are within a half mile walk, along the street and trail network, of each of the MAX stations.  This is done by using a routable network that is created from [OpenStreetMap](www.osm.org) data using ArcGIS’s [Network Analyst](http://www.esri.com/software/arcgis/extensions/networkanalyst).  The network is used a set of what are called isochrones (one for each station), which are irregular polygons that encapsulate the areas that can be reached by traveling the given walking distance or less.

From there, tax lots that intersect these isochrones are selected, and the development year associated with each selected tax lot is compared to the decision to build year for all MAX stations that are within walking distance of that property.  If a tax lot year is more recent or equal to any of those station dates (meaning that it was built after information was publicly available that the associated MAX line would be built) the value of that property is added to the total tabulation of the worth of development around light rail.

Another part of this analysis is gauging growth during this time period in the surrounding, Portland metropolitan region for purposes of comparison.  The determination of whether a tax lot that is outside of walking distance of a MAX station should be included in the figures that attempt to capture this broader growth is based on similar criteria to the development around light rail tabulation.  The nearest MAX station to each of these properties is determined, and the development year of those tax lots is compared to the ‘decision to build’ year of its nearest station.   If the former value is greater than or equal to the latter, then the property’s market price is added to the numbers for region wide growth.

### Project History

This task was originally developed and conducted by a former TriMet employee and since inheriting it in 2013 I have changed some of the core processes that constitute the methodology.  The first major alteration is the technique used to determine properties that are within walking distance of MAX stations.  Previously a buffer was used capturing tax lots within a half mile of stations as-the-crows-flies.  The data was then manually inspected and properties that had barriers such as water bodies between them and a station were excluded.  This has been replaced by the street and trail routing process described above.  Second, the tax lot data which is obtained via Oregon Metro has some deficiencies such as incomprehensive development dates and inconsistent land use classifications.  To account for this a variant of the data set was being maintained internally at TriMet.  I extracted the unique information from this internal data and delivered it to Metro, but also concluded that manual data collection in this vein was outside the scope of what we do at TriMet and discontinued it.  We now use the data as it is released by Metro each quarter in conjunction with supplementary information that’s been obtained from other regional agencies.  For further information the techniques used in each step of the analysis see the projects [README](https://github.com/grant-humphries/dev-near-light-rail/blob/master/README.md) and for details on how to interpret the statistical documents that this work flow produces see it's [metadata](https://github.com/grant-humphries/dev-near-light-rail/blob/master/documentation/METADATA.md).
